A year ago today, the Iraqi city of Mosul fell to Islamic State militants, an event that should have shattered any lingering illusions that Islamic State was the "JV" of radical Islamic terrorist groups. For the past 12 months we have seen its vicious campaign to establish a new Caliphate carved out of Syria and Iraq play out on computer and television screens across the globe. We have seen American, Israeli, British and Japanese captives beheaded. We have seen a brave Jordanian pilot burned alive. We have seen mass executions of Egyptian Christians. We have seen the civilian populations of Syria and Iraq brutalized, with woman and children crucified, raped, tortured and forced to accept the Sharia law imposed by the Islamic State.

While these atrocities have grabbed the headlines, Islamic State has also been engaged in a steady campaign of territorial expansion, both in the region and beyond. Other major Iraqi cities, including Fallujah and Ramadi, have fallen to the Islamic State. It has extended its operations to Libya and allied with Boko Haram in Nigeria. So-called "lone wolf" plots to attack us here at home have cropped up from Texas to Massachusetts.

Just this week, the Islamic State has captured dozens of Eritrean Christians in Libya and announced its intention to conquer the Iraqi capital of Baghdad, a threat that may be more sensational than real, but which demonstrates its broadening ambitions. Even more disturbingly, reports are surfacing that the Islamic State may be working on chlorine-based chemical weapons and even a crude "dirty bomb" fashioned out of the radioactive material seized from Iraqi medical facilities.

Even so, Islamic State is not yet invincible, and we should not fall into the trap of thinking it cannot be defeated. Determined efforts against it have proved effective, for example at Tikrit in Iraq and Kobani in Syria. But Tikrit was captured by the Iran-backed Shiite militias, some of whom have proven almost as vicious as the Islamic State. Kobani was defended by the Kurdish Peshmerga forces, not the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF). And these defeats have proven isolated events, while the larger momentum has been in Islamic State's favor.It's time to tell the American people the truth. One year into the program, we must admit that the Obama administration strategy, which has consisted of a limited U.S. air campaign, a program to train and equip the ISF and a directive to achieve sectarian political reconciliation in Baghdad, is failing.

Unfortunately, the administration cannot see this simple truth. While the president did admit this week that his strategy is imperfect and lacking in details, his solution appears to be more of the same as he recommended more trainers and made increasingly desperate pleas to Baghdad to fill in the blanks.

Enough. We can't afford another year of deliberation and half-hearted measures that will only further embolden Islamic State and tip it toward victory. What we have been doing isn't working, and doubling down on a failed strategy will not result in success. There are still choices besides continuing President Obama's botched strategy, or re-deploying tens of thousands of American combat troops to Iraq.

For starters, we have to stop understanding the mission against the Islamic State as an extension of the 2003 invasion to topple Saddam Hussein, which then mushroomed into an effort to turn Iraq into a western-style democracy. Our mission now should be to destroy the Islamic State terrorists whose avowed purpose is to harm America and our allies, not to turn Iraq into a democratic utopia.

Given the dysfunctional state of Iraq, we also need to let go of the fantasy that the ISF is going to be our boots on the ground. The fact is, as Pentagon spokesman Col. Steve Warren admitted this week, that we simply do not have the requisite number of Iraqi recruits to make this strategy effective. It doesn't matter how many trainers we send if there is no one there for them to train.