Thank You. President Falwell and David thank you very much for inviting my wife Jane and me to be with you this morning. We appreciate the invitation very much. And let me start off by acknowledging what I think all of you already know, and that is the views that many here at Liberty University have and I on a number of important issues are very very different.

I believe in women's rights and the right of a woman to control her own body.

I believe in gay rights and gay marriage.

Those are my views and it is no secret. But I came here today because I believe from the bottom of my heart that it is vitally important for those of us who hold different views to be able to engage in a civil discourse. Too often in our country, and I think both sides bare responsibility for us, there is too much shouting at each other, there is too much making fun of each other. Now in my view, and I say this as somebody whose voice is horse because I've given dozens of speeches in the last few months, it is easy to go out and talk to people who agree with you. I was in Greensboro, NC just last night. We had 9k people out mostly they agreed with me and tonight we'll be in Monasses and have thousands out and they agree with me. That's not hard to do. That's what politicians by and large do. We go out and we talk to people who agree with us. But it is harder but not less important to communicate with those who do not agree with us on every issue. And it is important to see where if possible, and I do believe it is possible, to find common ground.

Now, Liberty University is a religious school, obviously. And all of you are proud of that. You are a school which as all of us in our own way tries to understand the meaning of morality. What does it mean to live a moral life. And you try to understand in this very complicated modern world that we live in what the words of the bible mean in today's society. You are a school which tries to teach its students how to behave with decency and with honesty and how you can best relate to your fellow human beings and I applaud you for trying to achieve those goals.

Let me take a moment (or a few moments) to tell you what motivates me in the work that I do as a public servant as a Senator from the State of Vermont and let me tell you that it goes without saying that I am far far from being a perfect human being. But I am motivated by a vision that exists in all the great religions-in Christianity, in Judaism, in Islam, in Buddhism and other religions. And that vision is so beautifully and clearly stated in Matthew 7:12 and it states: "So in everything do to others what you would have them do to you for this sums up the law and the prophets." That is the golden rule. Do unto others what you would have them do to you. That is the golden rule and it is not very complicated.

Let me be frank as I said a moment ago. I understand that the issues of abortion and gay marriage are issues you feel strongly about. We disagree on those issues. I get that. Let me respectfully suggest that there are other issues out there that are of enormous consequence to our country and in fact to the entire world that maybe just maybe we do not disagree on, and maybe, just maybe, we can try to work together to resolve them.

Amos 5:24 "But let justice roll on like a river righteousness like a never failing stream" Justice treating others the way we want to be treated treating all people no matter their race their color their stature in life, with respect and with dignity. Now here is my point. Some of you may agree with me and some of you may not. In my view, it would be hard for anyone in this room today to make the case that the united states of America, our great country, a great country which all of us love, it would be hard to make the case that we are a just society or anything resembling a just society today. In the united states of America today there is massive injustice in terms of income and wealth inequality. Injustice is rampant.

We live, and I hope all of you know this, in the wealthiest country in the history of the world. But most Americans don't know that. Because almost all of that wealth and income is going to the top one percent. Now that's the truth. We are living in a time, and I want all of you if you would, put this in the context of the bible, not me, the context of the bible, we are living in a time where a handful of people have wealth beyond comprehension. And I'm talking about tens of billions of dollars. Enough to support their families for thousands of years with huge yachts and jet planes and tens of billions. More money than they would ever know what to do with. But at that very same moment, there are millions of people in our country let alone the rest of the world who are struggling to feed their families, they are struggling to put a roof over their heads, and some of them are sleeping out on the streets. They are struggling to find money to go to a doctor when they are sick. Now when we talk about morality and when we talk about justice we have to in my view understand that there is no justice when so few have so much and so many have so little.

There is no justice, and I want you to hear this clearly, when the top one tenth of one percent, not one percent, the top one tenth of one percent, today in America owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent. And in your hearts you will have to determine the morality of that and the justice of that.

In my view there is no justice when here in Virginia and Vermont and all over this country. Millions of people are working long hours for abysmally low wages of $7.25 an hour. Of 8 dollars an hour. 9 dollars an hour. Working hard but unable to bring in enough money to adequately feed their kids and yet at the same time 58 percent of all new income generated is going to the top one percent. You have got to think about the morality of that the justice of that and weather or not that's what we want to see in our country.

In my view there is no justice when in recent years we have seen a proliferation of millionaires and billionaires while at the same time the united states of America has the highest rate of childhood poverty of any major country on earth. How can we, I want you to go into your hearts, how can we talk about morality about justice when we turn our backs on the children of our country?

Now you've got to think about it. You've got think about it and you've got to feel it in your guts. Are you content, do you think it's moral that 20 percent of children in this country, the wealthiest country in the history of the world, are living in poverty? Do you think it's acceptable that 40 percent of African American children are living in poverty?

In my view there is no justice and morality suffers when in our wealthy country millions of children go to bed hungry. That is not morality. And that in my view is not what America should be about.

In my view, there is no justice when the fifteen, fifteen wealthiest people in this country in the last two years, two years, saw their wealth increased by 170 billion dollars. Two years. Wealthiest fifteen people in this country saw their wealth increase by 170 billion dollars. My friends, that is more wealth acquired in a two year period than is owned by the bottom 130 million Americans. And while the very very rich become much richer, millions of families have no savings at all. Nothing in the bank. And they worry every single day that if their car breaks down they can't get to work and if they can't get to work they loose their jobs and if they loose their jobs they don't feed their families. In the last two years, fifteen people saw 170 billion dollar increase in their wealth, 45 million Americans live in poverty. That in my view is not justice. That is a rigged economy designed by the wealthiest people in this country to benefit the wealthiest people in this country at the expense of everybody else.

In my view, there is no justice when thousands of Americans die every single year because they don't have any health insurance and don't go to a doctor when they should. I have talked personally to doctors throughout Vermont and physicians all over this country. And without exception they tell me that there are times when patients walk into their office very very sick. And they say, "why didn't you come in here when you were sick?" And the answer is, "I don't have any health insurance or I have a high deductible, and I thought the problem would get better." and sometimes it doesn't and sometimes they die because they lack health insurance. That is not justice that is not morality. People should not be dying in the united states of America when they are sick. What that is, is an indication that we are the only major country on earth that does not guarantee health care to all people as a right and I think we should change that.

I think that when we talk about morality what we are talking about is all of gods children the poor the wretched they have a right to go to a doctor when they are sick. You know, there is a lot of talk in this country from politicians about "family values". Well let me tell you about a family value. In my view, there is no justice when low income and working class mothers are forced to separate from their babies one or two weeks after birth and go back to work because they need the money that their jobs provide. Now I know everybody here, we all are, maybe in different ways, but all of us believe in family values. Jane and I have four kids, we have seven beautiful grandchildren, we believe in family values. But it is not a family value when all of you know that the most important moments in time of a human being's life is the first weeks and months after that baby is born. That is the moment when mother bonds with her baby and gets to love and know her baby and dad is there as well. That's what a family is about. And those of you, at least those of you who are parents, more parents back here than there I suspect, you know what an unforgettable moment that is, what an important moment that is. And I want you to think weather you believe it is a family value that the united states of America is the only, the only country on earth that does not provide paid family and medical leave.

Now in English, what that means is that all over the world, when a woman has a baby she is guaranteed the right because society understands how important that moment is, she is guaranteed the right to stay home and get income in order to nurture her baby. And that is why I believe when we talk about family values that the united states government must provide at least twelve weeks of paid family and medical leave.

In my view, there is no justice in our country when youth unemployment exists at tragic, tragically high levels. I requested a study last month from a group of economists and what they told me is that 51 percent of African American high school graduates between 17-20 are unemployed or underemployed. 51 percent. We have in this country sufficient amounts of money to put more people in jail than any country on earth. The united states has more people in jail than China, a communist, authoritarian country. But apparently we do not have enough money to provide jobs and education to our young people and I believe that is wrong.

I am not a theologian, I am not an expert on the bible, nor am I a Catholic. I'm just a united states Senator from the small State of Vermont. I agree with Pope Francis who will soon be coming to visit us in the united states. I agree with Pope Francis when he says and I quote, "The current financial crisis originated in a profound human crisis. The denial of the primacy of the human person." And this is what he writes. "We have created new idols the worship of the ancient golden calf has returned in a new and ruthless guise in the idolatry of money and the dictatorship of an impersonal economy lacking a truly human purpose." end of quote. And the Pope also writes, "There is need for financial reform along ethical lines that would produce in its turn an economic reform to benefit everyone. Money has to serve, not to rule." end of quote.

Now those are pretty profound words which I hope we will all think about. In the Pope's view and I agree with him, we are living in a nation and in a word and the bible speaks to this issue. In a nation and in a world which worships not love of brothers and sisters not love of the poor and the sick but worships the acquisition of money and great wealth. I do not believe that should be the country we should be living in.

Money and wealth should serve the people. The people should not have to serve money and wealth.

Throughout human history there has been endless discussion that is part of who we are as human beings, people who think and ask questions. Endless discussion and endless debate about the meaning of justice and the meaning of morality. And I know that here at liberty university those are the kinds of discussions you have every day and those are the kind of discussions you should be having and the kind of discussions we should be having all over America.

I would hope and I conclude with this thought, I would hope very much that as part of that discussion and part of that learning process some of you will conclude that if we are honest in striving to be a moral and just society it is imperative that we have the courage to stand with the poor to stand with working people and when necessary take on very powerful and wealthy people whose greed in my view is doing this country enormous harm.

Thank you all very much.