SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS: Thank you very much. John, thank you very
much for inviting me. And let me thank all of you who are here this afternoon. Before I
begin the thrust of my remarks, let me give you a very short thumbnail sketch of my
political life, because my journey here to Washington, D.C. has been a little bit different
than many of my Senate colleagues.
As John mentioned, I was born in Brooklyn, New York in 1941. My father came
to this country from Poland at the age of 17, without a penny in his pocket, and without
much of an education. And I always think back about the extraordinary bravery that was
his as well as many other millions of people who came to this country with so little. My
mom graduated high school in New York City. My dad worked for almost his entire life
as a paint salesman. And we were solidly lower middle class.
My parents, my brother and I lived in a small rent-controlled apartment. My
mother’s dream was to move out of that small apartment and own a home of her own.
She died young, and she never fulfilled that dream. As a kid, in many, many ways, I
learned what lack of money means to a family. And that is a lesson I have never
forgotten.
My wife Jane and I have been married for 27 years. We have four great kids and
seven beautiful grandchildren. And without trying to be overly dramatic about it, what
motivates me politically, why I do what I do, is to make sure that these kids, and all of
our children, can live in a wonderful country and a wonderful world.
Representing the great State of Vermont, as John indicated, I am the longest
serving Independent in American congressional history. I served 16 years in the House as
Vermont’s lone Congressman. And in 2006, I was elected to the Senate and reelected in
2012. I began my rather unusual political career back in 1971 as a candidate for the U.S.
Senate on a small third party called the Liberty Union. And I received two percent of the
vote.
Not dissuaded, I ran a year later for Governor of the State of Vermont, and
received one percent of the vote. [laughter] Not being the brightest light on the block, I
ran again for the Senate and received four percent of the vote, and two years later ran for
Governor and received six percent of the vote. I thought that I would give the people of
Vermont a break, and I retired from politics in 1976.
Remembering one particular guy who said, “Bernie, I promise, I will vote for you
if you promise me you will never run for office again.” [laughter] In 1981, I was
persuaded by some friends to run for Mayor of Burlington, the largest city in our state,
against a five-term Democratic Mayor. I ran as an independent. Nobody but nobody
thought that we had a chance to win. We did. And that very remarkable election, we put
together an extraordinary coalition of workers and trade unionists, of environmentalists,
of neighborhood activists, of low income organizations, of women’s groups, of college
students. 
4
And that type of coalition politics of bringing together around a progressive
agenda shapes my view of politics today. And a campaign which cost about $4,000
dollars, I and the people who supported me knocked on thousands of doors in the city.
And let me tell you, it gets cold in Vermont in March.
On election night, when the votes were counted, we won the working class wards
by something like two to one, and won the election by all of 14 votes. It was the biggest
political upset in modern Vermont history. And after the recount, the margin of victory
was reduced to 10 votes.
Without going into any great lengths here, I took office with 11 out of the 13
members of the City Council, Democrats and Republicans, in very strong opposition to
my agenda. And trust me, if those of you in this room think that President Obama has
gotten a rough time from Republicans, that was nothing. That was nothing compared to
what I and my supporters experienced during my first year in office.
But, one year later, in strong support of what we were attempting to do, and what
we wanted to do, a slate of candidates working with me defeated a number of the
incumbent obstructionists. A year after that, in an election in which the voter turnout was
almost double from what it was when I was first elected, I pretty easily defeated a
Democratic and Republican candidates, continued to get reelected. And my last election,
defeated a candidate from both political parties.
In 1988, I ran for the U.S. Congress in a three-way race. I came in second with 38
percent of the vote. Two years later, I won that election by a 16 percent-- winning with
over 16 percent more than my opponent. In 2006, with the retirement of Senator Jim
Jeffords, and with the support of Democrats, I won Vermont’s Senate seat against the
wealthiest person in the State of Vermont, a candidate who spent three times more money
than anyone had every spent before in our state’s history, and ran a very, very negative
race. I won with 67 percent of the vote. And then, in 2012, I won reelection with 71
percent of the vote.
As Mayor of Burlington, my administration took on virtually every special and
powerful interest in the City and in the State. Against the wishes of developers and the
railroads, we created a beautiful people-oriented waterfront and a bike path along Lake
Champlain. We developed the first municipal housing land trust in the country for
affordable housing. We won national recognition for urban beautification by planting
thousands of trees throughout the city. And we made major improvements in our streets
and sidewalks. We implemented the largest environmental program then in the state’s
history, by building a new wastewater facility to prevent untreated waste from going into
the lake.
We started a youth office, which created a beautiful daycare center, a little league
program, afterschool programs, and a teen center, all of which continue to exist today.
We were the first city in Vermont to break its dependence on the regressive property tax.
We made major changes in Burlington Police Department, moving in the direction of 
5
community policing. We started a very active and successful arts program and women’s
counsel. The result, for the last several decades, Burlington has been considered to be one
of the most beautiful and livable small cities in America. And I invite all of you, not only
to visit Burlington, but to visit our beautiful State of Vermont.
In 1990, I became the first Independent elected to the U.S. House in 40 years.
And during my first year there, along with four other House members, we formed the
Congressional Progressive Caucus, which stands today as one of the largest and most
important caucuses in Congress, doing a great job representing the working families of
our country.
One of the first votes in the House that I cast was against the first Gulf War. I
believe that history will record that that was the right vote, as it was the-- [applause]-- as
was the vote I cast years later against the war in Iraq, a war which I considered to be one
of the worst foreign policy blunders in the modern history of our country.
[applause]
That war-- and I speak as the former Chairman of the Veteran’s Committee, who
learned, in my two years as Chairman, what the cost of war is. And that war cost us not
only the lives of thousands of wonderful and brave young men and women, but it also
created a situation where, today, hundreds of thousands-- some 500,000 men and women
have come home from Iraq and Afghanistan with post-traumatic stress disorder and
traumatic brain injury. They have come home with loss of arms and legs and their
eyesight and their hearing. That is the cost of war.
And before we get involved in another war, we should remember what war is
really about. [applause] And that war in Iraq also destabilized the entire region and
opened up the can of worms that we now see, where we are now fighting the barbaric
organization called ISIS and are deeply concerned about Iranian influence over Iraq.
While a member of the House Financial Resources Committee, I was one of those
who led the fight against the deregulation of Wall Street, an effort supported by both the
Republican and Democratic leadership. In retrospect, I think it is fair to say that most
people today do not believe that it was a great idea to end Glass-Steagall and to allow the
greed, recklessness, and illegal activity on Wall Street to go unchecked.
[applause]
I also strongly opposed the trade agreements written by corporate America and
again supported by Democratic and Republican Presidents, agreements like NAFTA,
KAFTA, permanent normal trade relations with China, and other trade agreements which
have cost us millions of decent paying jobs and have led this country to a race to the
bottom. And, needless to say, I strongly oppose the Trans-Pacific Partnership Trade
Agreement. 
6
[applause]
[applause]
While in the House, I took on the pharmaceutical industry and the outrageous
prices they charge our people, and became the first member of Congress to take
Americans across the Canadian border to purchase prescription drugs there. And I will
never forget that trip where women struggling with breast cancer bought the medicine
they need for one-tenth of the price in Montreal that they were paying in the United
States.
[applause]
And my understanding is that today, hundreds of thousands of people, sadly, have
to continue buying their medicine in Canada rather than in their local pharmacies.
As the Chairman of the Senate Veterans Committee, I worked hard in a bipartisan
way to pass the most significant veterans legislation passed in many, many years. This
legislation put over $15 billion dollars into improving veterans’ healthcare, into making
certain that the people who put their lives on the line to defend us get the best quality
healthcare possible and get it in a timely manner. And I have-- [applause]-- And one of
the wonderful honors that I have received in recent years is to have been the recipient of
the highest awards from both the American Legion and the VFW. And I am very grateful
to them for that acknowledgement.
As someone long concerned about healthcare, and our dysfunctional healthcare
system, I worked hard with Representative Jim Clyburn to put some $12 billion dollars
into federally qualified community health centers, which resulted in some four million
lower income Americans gaining access to healthcare, dental care, low-cost prescription
drugs, and mental health counseling. We also significantly expanded the National Health
Service Corps to provide debt forgiveness for new primary care physicians. The President
was very supportive of these efforts and, in my view, this program would have been one
of the success stories of the Affordable Care Act.
As one of the leaders in the Senate trying to combat the global crisis of climate
change, along with Senator Bob Menendez, I helped pass the Energy Efficiency Block
Grant program, which put billions of dollars into energy efficiency and sustainable
energy. Several years ago, working with several of my colleagues, I founded the
Defending Social Security Caucus. And we were successful in beating back massive
efforts to try to cut programs, cut Social Security, and benefits for disabled veterans from
some of the most powerful people in this country. And that’s an effort I will continue to
make.
[applause] 
7
Now that is a very brief description of my life and my political history. Let me go
to something more important. And that is the future of our country. And what I am going
to tell you now, I suspect not so many people who come up here will talk about. But as
somebody who has been described as being too gruff, as a grumpy grandfather, as too
abrupt and as not one of the more cheerful guys on Capitol Hill, I have to live up to my
reputation. So I will be gruff. I will be abrupt, and let you know what I think.
Today in a nation plagued by many, many concerns, the most serious problem we
face is the grotesque and growing level of wealth and income inequality. [applause] This
is a profound moral issue. It is a profound economic issue. And, as a result of Citizens
United, it is a profound political issue. This is the issue that impacts all other issues. Job
creation and income, infrastructure, tax reform, healthcare, climate change, the
environment, education, farm, housing, you name it, are all fundamentally impacted by
income and wealth inequality.
And let me be very honest with you and tell you what very few elected officials
will tell you. And that is, that given the incredible power of the billionaire class over the
economic life of this country, over politics, over media, I am absolutely convinced that
the struggling for economic and social justice, the struggle for a strong middle class, the
struggle for a vibrant democracy in which elections are not bought by the wealthy, will
not be won in our lifetime unless an unprecedented grassroots movement is developed,
which is prepared to take on and defeat the power of the one percent. [applause]
Over this last weekend, my wife and I had the opportunity to visit Selma,
Alabama and Montgomery, Alabama, along with many other members of Congress and
tens of thousands of citizens, to honor the incredible bravery of those who marched and
were beaten on Bloody Sunday 50 years ago. And we were there with my good friend
John Lewis and many other colleagues.
Standing outside of Martin Luther King’s small and modest Dexter Avenue
Church in Montgomery, I was reminded, very forcefully, that real change never takes
place without struggle, without the active participation of millions of people who are
prepared to stand up and fight for justice, of people who, in fact, are prepared to put their
lives on the line in those struggles.
The political battle of our time is not Republicans versus Democrats. It is not the
political gains inside the Beltway that preoccupy much of the media’s attention. It is not
the ugly 30-second TV ads that flood our airways. The political struggle of this moment
in our history is a declining middle class of millions of people working longer hours for
lower wages, if they are lucky enough to have jobs, against the power of a billionaire
class whose greed has no end.
[applause]
It is the struggle-- It is the struggle of Americans, black, white, Hispanic, Asian,
Native American, women and men, gay and straight, struggling for decent jobs and the 
8
income to adequately take care of their families, struggling for retirement security,
struggling for a decent education for their kids, struggling for healthcare, struggling for
dignity against the greed and power of a few on top who apparently want it all.
Economically, as many of you know, for the last 40 years, the great middle class
of our country, once the envy of the entire world, has been in decline. Despite exploding
technology, despite increased productivity, despite the global economy and the increase
in trade, millions of Americans today are working longer hours for lower wages. And we
have more people living in poverty today than at almost any time in the modern history of
America. Today, real unemployment is not 5.5 percent. Real unemployment is 11
percent, if you include those workers who have given up looking for work or working
part-time when they want to work full-time.
[applause]
Youth unemployment is over 17 percent. And African-American youth
unemployment is near 30 percent. Shamefully, we have, by far, the highest rate of
childhood poverty of any major country on earth. And despite the modest success of the
Affordable Care Act, some 40 million Americans continue to have no health insurance
while even more are underinsured or have heavy copayments or deductibles in their
insurance policies. We remain today, in 2015, the only major country on earth that does
not guarantee healthcare to all people as a right. And that is a shame to my mind.
[applause]
Now there are a lot of angry out there, all across this country. Some of them are in
the Occupy Wall Street movement, consider themselves progressive. Some are in the Tea
Party movement and see themselves as conservatives. But let me give you a hint as to
why we are angry and why they are angry. Since 1999, the typical middle class family
has seen its income go down by almost $5,000 dollars after adjusted for inflation. The
median male worker made $783 dollars less last year than he did 42 years ago, despite an
explosion of technology and productivity.
Are we better off today than we were six years ago when Bush left office? Of
course we are. But anyone who does not understand the suffering, anxiety and fear that
the middle class and working families of our country are experiencing today, has no idea
as to what’s going on in this country. And sometimes, that’s my perception of Capitol
Hill. There's a world here in Capitol Hill very distant from Vermont and the rest of the
country. And I think it’s imperative that we close that gap and begin to understand what's
going on with the working families of this country.
Meanwhile, while the middle class continues to disappear, the wealthiest people
and the largest corporations are doing phenomenally well. And the gap between the very,
very rich and everyone else is growing wider and wider and wider. Top one percent now
owns about 41 percent of the entire wealth of this country, while the bottom 60 percent 
9
owns less than two percent. Today, incredibly, the top one-tenth of one percent, one-tenth
of one percent now owns nearly as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent.
Today the Walton family, the owner of Wal-Mart, is now worth $157 billion
dollars. That is more wealth than the bottom 42 percent of the American people. The fact
of the matter is, that over the last 40 years, we have witnessed the Robin Hood principle
in reverse, and enormous transfer of wealth from the middle class and the poor to
multimillionaires and billionaires.
In 1985, the share of the nation’s wealth going to the bottom 90 percent was 36
percent. In 2013 it went down to just 22.8 percent. Listen to this. If the bottom 90 percent
had simply maintained the same share of our nation’s wealth as it did 30 years ago, it
would have more than $10 trillion dollars in wealth than is currently the case today.
Meanwhile, while the middle class has shrunk, the people on top are doing
extraordinarily well. Today, the richest one-tenth of one percent have increased their
share of our nation’s wealth by more than $8 trillion dollars over the last three decades.
Terms of income, as opposed to wealth. Since the great Wall Street collapse, 99
percent of all new income is going to the top one percent. So, our people all over this
country struggle, they worry how they're going to feed their kids, they worry how they're
going to send their kids to college, how they're going to do childcare, worry about their
parents, 99 percent of all new income generated in the last several years goes to the top
one percent. The very rich get richer. And everybody else gets poorer.
In 2013, just as an example, the top 25 hedge fund managers made more than $24
billion. That is equivalent to the full salaries of more than 425,000 public school teachers.
Is that what America is really supposed to be about? I don’t think so.
[applause]
But income and wealth inequality is not just the moral issue. It is not just an
economic issue. Maybe even more profoundly, it is a political issue. Because the people
who have the money are not putting their money under their mattresses. They are
investing heavily in the political process to make the rich even richer. As a result of the
disastrous Supreme Court decision on Citizens United, billionaire families are now able
to spend unlimited sums of money to purchase the candidates of their choice. I know that
sounds like a harsh statement. But if anyone doubts what goes on in Congress, that piece
of legislation after piece of legislation is done, is not done on behalf of the wealthy and
large corporations, then let me respectfully tell you, you don’t know what's going on in
Washington.
According to media reports, it appears at the Koch brothers are prepared to spend
more money in the next election than either the Democratic or Republican parties. In
other words, one family, the second wealthiest family in this country, worth
approximately $100 billion dollars, may well have a stronger political presence than
either one of the major two parties. 
10
Here is from a recent article in Politico. The Koch brothers and their allies are
pumping tens of millions of dollars into a data company that’s developing detailed stateof-the-art
profiles on 250 million Americans, giving the brothers political operation all
the earmarks of a national party. Further, the Koch network also has developed in-house
expertise in polling, message testing, fact-checking, advertising, media buying, dial
groups and donor maintenance. Add mastery of election law or corporate-minded
aggressiveness and years of patient experimentation, plus seemingly limitless cash, and
the Koch operation actually exceeds the Republican National Committee’s Data
Operation in many important respects.
And because they have an endless supply of money, they will only get stronger.
Now I want everyone in this room, and in fact those listening to this program, to step
back and take a deep breath, and tell me what you see. When the second wealthiest
family in this country, with an extreme right wing agenda, and a few of their billionaire
pals, have more political power than either of the two major political parties in this
country, what is that political system called? Well, I think it should be called by its
rightful name. It is not called democracy. It is called oligarchy. And that is the system we
are rapidly moving toward. And that is a system we must vigorously oppose.
[applause]
Now I probably have exceeded my time. I always get people a little bit nervous
here. Let me very briefly-- If I go on too long, yank me. That’s all right. I've been yanked
once or twice before. Let me just touch on what a progressive agenda looks like, to begin
to address some of the problems that I mentioned.
First of all, let’s never forget, today, despite the improving economy, we have a
major jobs and income crisis. What do we do? We need to rebuild our crumbling
infrastructure. I have introduced, along with Barbara Mikulski of Maryland, a trillion
dollar piece of legislation that will go a long way to rebuild our crumbling roads, bridges,
airports, water systems, and, by the way, support the creation of 13 million decent paying
jobs.
[applause]
 And when we talk about jobs and income, the $7.25 minimum wage here at the
federal level is a starvation wage. We need to raise it over a period of years to $15 dollars
an hour. Nobody working 40 hours a week in this country should live in poverty.
[applause] Further, despite what my Republican friends may think, climate change is real.
Climate change is caused by human activity and is already causing devastating harm. We
have got to transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and
sustainable energy. [applause]
We have to pass pay equity for women workers. It is unacceptable that women are
making 78 cents an hour compared to men. [applause] Fourth, if we’re going to save the 
11
middle class of this country, we need to fundamentally transform our trade policies. They
are not working. Corporate America is going to have to start investing in the United
States not in China. [applause]
Fifthly, we got to learn from the rest of the world that investing in higher
education is an asset. It is a positive step. It is a national disgrace that millions of our
young people are graduating school deeply in debt and many others cannot afford to go to
college. That is not the way you create a great nation. Anyone who has the ability and
desire should be able to get a college education regardless of the income of their family.
[applause]
Sixth, you cannot regulate Wall Street. Wall Street is regulating the Congress.
The sixth largest financial institutions have assets of almost 60 percent of our GDP. If
Teddy Roosevelt were President today, you know what he would say? “Break ‘em up.”
And he would be right. It’s hard to break up large Wall Street banks. [applause]
So I mentioned earlier United States remains the only major country on earth
without a national healthcare program. And yet, we spend almost twice as much per
capita. It is time for America to guarantee healthcare to every man, woman and child as a
right of citizenship. [applause]
Some of my colleagues in Congress, some of my Republican colleagues are
working day and night to try to cut Social Security, cut Medicare, cut Medicaid. Needless
to say, I strongly disagree. We’ve got to expand Social Security, not cut Social Security.
[applause] We need real tax reform. It is unacceptable that major corporation after major
corporation, making billions of dollars, pays nothing in taxes, or that we lose $100 billion
a year in revenue because these companies stash their money in the Cayman Island,
Bermuda, and other tax havens. It is time for these large corporations to rejoin America
and start paying their fair share of taxes.
[applause]
So let me thank Mr. Hughes and my forgiveness for over-extending my time. But
we are at a crucial moment in American history. And it is imperative that we learn from
the Civil Rights Movement, which achieved so many extraordinary victories, that we
organize, that we educate, that we bring people together to create an America that works
for all of us, and not just a handful of billionaires. Thank you all very, very much.
[applause] 