 Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you,
Senator Lieberman. You know, one of the best things about working in the Senate is the
opportunity to learn and to know from colleagues whose statesmanship is an example for
the rest of us. In my brief time in the Senate, I’ve had the chance to know Joe Lieberman
and learn from him. He represents a view of America’s role in the world and the tradition
of Democratic leaders like Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman through John F.
Kennedy and “Scoop” Jackson. In my every experience with him, it’s been evident that 
 
5
Joe Lieberman is a statesman who takes positions on every important national issue
because he believes they best serve our country’s interests and values. So, thank you,
Joe, for your introduction and, more importantly, thank you for your example. I’m
privileged to serve with you.
I want to thank Brookings for this opportunity. I wanted to contribute
today a few thoughts on the current debate over America’s role in the world in this, the
21st century. And I wanted to give this speech today to share with you my observations
of someone who has a long-term interest in foreign policy, but now finds himself in the
role of foreign policy-maker.
I’m always cautious about generalizations in politics, but until recently the
general perception was that American conservatism believed in robust and muscular
foreign policy. That was certainly the hallmark of the foreign policies of both President
Bushes and of President Reagan. But when I arrived in the Senate last year, I found that
some of the traditional sides in the foreign policy debate had shifted. On the one hand, I
found liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans working together to advocate our
withdrawal from Afghanistan or staying out of Libya. On the other hand, I found myself
partnering with Democrats, like Bob Menendez or Senator Casey, on a more forceful
foreign policy. In fact, the resolutions I co-authored with Senator Casey on Syria and the
resolution I co-sponsored with Senator Menendez condemning fraudulent elections in
Nicaragua were held up by Republicans.
And so, I recently joked the other day that today in the U.S. Senate, on
foreign policy, the further you move to the right, the likelier you are to end up on the left.
And I found this sentiment to be true not just in the Senate, but back home as well. For
example, many of my loyal supporters were very highly critical of my decision to call for a 
 
6
more active role in Libya.
Now, the easiest thing for me to do here today is to give a speech on my
disagreements with this administration on foreign policy, and I do have many, but I
wanted to begin by addressing another trend in our body politic, one that increasingly
says that it is time to focus less on the world and more on ourselves.
Now, I always begin by reminding people of how good a strong and
engaged America has been for the world. And in making that argument, I have been
recently relying heavily on Brookings fellow Bob Kagan’s timely book, The World America
Made. He did not pay me to say that. (Laughter) He begins this book with a pretty
useful exercise. He asks readers to imagine what world order might have existed from
the end of World War II until the present if America -- absent American leadership. Could
we say for certain that it would look anything like America’s vision of an increasingly freer
and more open international system where catastrophic conflicts between great powers
were avoided? Democracy and free market capitalism flourished? Where prosperity
spread wider and wider, and billions of people emerged from poverty? Would it have
occurred, if after the war, America had minded its own business and left the world to sort
out its affairs without our leadership? Almost surely not. As Bob persuasively argued,
every world order in history has reflected the interest and the beliefs of its strongest
power just as this world order still largely reflects ours.
Now, of course, many of these things were not achieved by us on our
own. They weren’t achieved because we succeeded in all our international endeavors.
They weren’t achieved because everyone always agreed with everything we did. And
they weren’t achieved because we were the most popular country on Earth.
They were achieved because the United States had a vision, the will and 
 
7
means to do the hard work of bringing it into existence, and then of maintaining it. We
had the will and the means to defend its norms and institutions and the security of our
partners, face down its challengers, assist other people in attaining their liberty, keep
trade routes open, and support the expansion of free-market capitalism that accelerated
the growth of the global economy. And we did it without coveting other countries’
territories or seizing their assets or robbing them of their opportunities.
The purpose of the institutions we established, from the United Nations
to the World Bank and the IMF, was to spread peace and prosperity, not to certain
narrow American interests. Other nations consented to our leadership because they saw
what the economic and political values of the American worldview had achieved for us
and they wanted the same for themselves. They followed us because they believed that
our way, the American way, the principals of free people and free markets, was the best
way to advance their societies. But as Bob also points out, we haven’t ever
really solved this role. And despite our worries, doubts, and occasional resentment,
we’re proud of it and we should be. As Bob’s book highlights, a number of facts are
worth repeating here today about the post-World War II world America made. For
example, the global GDP has risen 4 percent annually since the end of World War II, 4
times faster than the average in past centuries. Four billion people, mostly outside of
Europe and North America, have been lifted out of poverty during that time. The number
of democracies in the world have proliferated nearly tenfold. And we have had the
longest period of peace between the great powers ever.
Now, before anyone accuses me of claiming that America has ushered in
the Biblical promise of a new Heaven and a new Earth, let’s stop and remember that the
world America made is better, but it is not perfect. But it is vastly more peaceful and 
 
8
prosperous than any other age in recorded history. So, this is the world America made.
But what is the role for America now? Is now finally the time for us to
mind our own business? Is now the time to allow others to lead? Is now the time for us
to play the role of equal partner?
Well, I always start by reminding people that what happens all over the
world is our business. Every aspect of our lives is directly impacted by global events.
The security of our cities is connected to the security of small hamlets in Afghanistan and
Pakistan and Yemen and Somalia. Our cost of living, the safety of our food, the value of
the things we invent, make, and sell are just a few examples of everyday aspects of our
lives that are directly related to events abroad and make it impossible for us to focus only
on our issues here at home.
The next question I’m asked then, is why doesn’t someone else lead for
a change? Why do we always have to be taking care of the problems of the world? Isn’t
it time for someone else to step up? And I always begin my answer to that question with
a question of my own. If we start doing less, who’s going to do more? For example,
would a world order -- or China, at least as we know China right now, as the leading
power, be as benignly disposed to the political and economic aspirations of other nations
as we are? Now, look, I still have hope that behind the curtain of secrecy that veils the
Chinese state that there are voices that advocate for the peaceful and responsible rise of
that nation, voices that reject the idea of a global power as a zero-sum game. We hold
out hope for a new China of tomorrow, but for now we must deal with the China we know
today, a China which enjoys its closest relationships with countries like North Korea and
Iran. So at least for now, it would be foolish to be confident in the idea that China can be
counted on to defend and support global, economic, and political freedom or to take up 
 
9
the cause of human rights.
By the way, the rest of the world has -- especially their neighbors -- have
figured that out too and they would prefer not to take that risk.
The short answer is that at least not yet anyways, there is no one else to
hand off the baton to, even if that were a good idea. On the most difficult transnational
challenges of our time, who will lead if we do not? The answer, at least today, is that no
other nation or organization on earth is willing or able to do so.
So, finally I’ll be asked, if we still have to lead, can’t we at least be equal
partners with somebody else? In fact, shouldn’t we rely on other nations to carry more of
the burden? After all, we all know that they resent us telling them what to do, right?
Well, in this new century more than ever before, America should work with our capable
allies in finding solutions to global problems, not because America’s gotten weaker, but
because our partners have grown stronger.
It’s worth pointing out, by the way, that this is not a new idea for us. Our
greatest successes have always occurred in partnership with other likeminded nations.
Now, America has acted unilaterally in the past, and I believe it should continue to do so
in the future when necessity requires, but our preferred option, since the U.S. became a
global leader, has been to work with others to achieve our goals.
So, yes, global problems do require international coalitions and on that
point, this Administration is correct, but effective international coalitions don’t form
themselves; they need to be instigated and led, and more often than not, they can only
be instigated and led by the United States. And I believe that’s what this Administration
sometimes fails to understand. Yes, there are more countries able and willing to join
efforts to meet the global challenges of our time, but experience has proven that 
 
10
American leadership is almost always indispensible to its success.
You can see this in the actions of -- or sometimes lack thereof, of the
World Trade Organization or the UN Security Council, and when American influence is
diminished, for example, by the one nation, one vote formula of the UN General
Assembly or the UN Human Rights Council, we see absurd and often appalling results.
Multilateral international organizations can be a forum for forming international coalitions,
but as we have repeatedly seen over the last few years, the more difficult the problem,
the likelier bad actors will spoil meaningful solutions within the current system of
international organizations.
For example, we can’t always rely on the UN Security Council to achieve
consensus on major threats to international peace and security. As we’ve seen on North
Korea, on Syria, on Iran, China and Russia simply will not join that consensus when they
do not perceive the problem as a threat to their narrow national interests.
Instead, they exercise their veto or threat of a veto to thwart effective and
timely response. The Security Council remains a very valuable forum but not an
indispensible one. We can’t walk away from a problem because some members of the
Security Council refuse to act.
In those instances where the veto power of either China or Russia
impede the world’s ability to deal with a significant threat, it is the United States that will
have to organize and lead coalitions with or without Security Council resolutions.
And this concept, by the way, is neither novel nor partisan. President
Clinton acted exactly in this way in Kosovo with the support of Congressional leaders like
Senator Lieberman. Everywhere we look, we are presented with opportunities for
American leadership to help shape a better world in this new century. 
 
11
And we have to view these opportunities through the context of the fact
that in every region of the world other countries look apprehensively at the growing
influence of newly emerging powers in their midst and look to the U.S. to counter balance
them.
In some instances, these emerging strategic realignments are not
inevitably destined for conflict. For example, if China chooses to conform its rise to the
international order, there is much to be hopeful for in the Pacific region.
On the other hand, there is no reason for optimism about Iranian designs
on regional dominance in the Middle East. And it’s indeed in that region where
multilateral cooperation is most urgently needed right away, whether in bringing an end to
the bloodshed and the Assad tyranny in Syria or in helping Egypt overcome economic
hardships and move towards the establishment of a true democracy, or in addressing the
threat posed by a nuclear Iran. America shouldn’t try to solve any of these problems
alone, but neither will any of these challenges be addressed without strong and creative
American leadership.
Now other nation has the influence, relationships, or the reputation for
seeking lasting solutions to intractable problems than the United States has. Iran’s
nuclear ambitions, by the way, are more than just weapons. Iran wants to become the
dominant power in the Middle East. But given Iran’s history of human rights abuses,
fomenting sectarian conflict and sponsorship of terrorism as a tool of state craft, the world
must never allow that to happen.
Fortunately, preventing a dominant Iran is a goal we share with virtually
every other nation in the region. Now, certainly we welcome Russia and China’s
cooperation in facing this challenge, but the prospect of a nuclear capable Iran is so 
 
12
unacceptable that we must be prepared to act with or without them.
And we have a host of willing partners in every region of the world who
share our concerns and are relying on our leadership to compel Iran to abandon its
ambitions. Now, preferably, we can succeed through coercive means short of military
force. We should be open to negotiations with Iran, but always remember that they
should not be deemed a success when they only lead to further negotiations.
Stronger pressure shouldn’t be postponed and the expectation of our
forbearance will encourage Iran to act in good faith. Nothing in our experience with Iran
suggests that it considers such gestures anything other than a lack of resolve on our part.
Ultimately, however, we must remember that their ambitions so far have
come with a high tolerance for pain; therefore, even as we work through the United
Nations and with the international community on sanctions, and on negotiations, we
should operate on a dual track. We should also be preparing our allies and the world for
the uncomfortable reality that unfortunately, if all else fails, preventing a nuclear Iran may
tragically require military solution.
The goal of preventing a dominant Iran is so important that every
regional policy we adopt should be crafted with that overriding goal in mind. The current
situation in Syria is an example of such an approach. The fall of Assad would be a
significant blow to Iran’s ambitions. On those grounds alone, we should be seeking to
help the people of Syria bring him down.
But on the Foreign Relations Committee, I’ve noticed that some
members are so concerned about the challenges of a post-Assad Syria that they’ve lost
sight of the advantages of it. First, Iran would lose its ally and see its influence and ability
to cause trouble in the region would be correspondingly reduced, but Hezbollah would 
 
13
lose its most important ally too along with its weapons supplier. And the prospects for a
more stable, peaceful, and freer Lebanon would improve.
Secondly, the security of our ally, the strongest and most enduring
democracy in the region, Israel, with whom we are bound by the strongest ties of mutual
interest and shared value and affection would improve as well. And so would the
prospects for peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors.
Finally, the nations in the region see Syria as a test of our continued
willingness to lead in the Middle East. If we prove unwilling to provide leadership, they
will conclude that we are no longer a reliable security partner and they will decide to take
matters into their own hands, and that means a regional arms race, the constant threat of
armed conflict, and crippling fuel prices here at home due to the instability.
The most powerful and influential nation in the world cannot ask smaller,
more vulnerable nations to take risks while we stand on the sidelines. We have to lead
because the rewards of effective leadership are so great.
Forming and leading a coalition with Turkey and the Arab League
Nations to assist the opposition by creating a safe haven and equipping the opposition
with food, medicine, communication tools, and potentially weapons, will not only weaken
Iran, it will ultimately increase our ability to influence the political environment of a postAssad
Syria.
The spread and success of political and economic freedom in the Middle
East is in our vital interest and it will certainly present challenges, as newly enfranchised
societies elect leaders whose views and purposes oppose and even offend ours.
But in the long-term, because governments that rule by the consent of
the governed just be responsive to the material needs and demands of their people, they 
 
14
are less likely to engage in costly confrontations that harm their economies and deprive
their people of the opportunity to improve their circumstances.
The expansion and success of political and economic freedom is critical
to our interests in every region of the world and nowhere more so than in our own
hemisphere. It’s no coincidence that the rise of economic prosperity in the Western
Hemisphere is directly related or directly coincides with the democratic gains of the
previous two decades. Mexico, Peru, and Colombia are three examples of nations that
have weathered the global economic downturn in a stronger position than ever.
Our goal for our region should be pretty straightforward: our coalition of
neighboring democratic nations that trade freely and live peacefully with one another.
Other than overcoming our own past indifference and the lack of focus on this goal, there
are two other challenges. The first is Venezuela and the other ALBA countries whose
overt -- and their overt anti-Americanism.
Now, they make a lot of noise and we can’t ignore their anti-democratic
abuses or their growing closeness to Iran, but our greater challenge, really, is a second
and more subtle one and that’s the effort of some nations to replace our influence with
their influence and to use protectionism and unfair practices to pursue that aim.
The anecdote for both of these problems is to reengage energetically in
the region. First, we must be a clear and consistent advocate for freedom, and to be free
isn’t just limited to elections, it’s a way of governance. In Venezuela, Nicaragua, Bolivia,
and Ecuador, elected leaders have used their power to undermine fundamental freedoms
by attacking the press, the courts, and their political opponents.
Second, we need to commit to being a reliable partner as our neighbors
cope with significant security challenges. Both Mexico and Colombia, they need our 
 
15
continued commitment to win their respective wars against criminal organizations. And
we must also make it abundantly clear that we will not tolerate Iran exporting violence
and terrorism to our hemisphere.
Third, we must reject protectionism and instead embrace the ultimate
goal of a free trade area of the Americas. The recently approved free trade agreements
with Colombia and Panama was a good step. We need to move forward to bring both
Canada and Mexico into the transpacific partnership.
And fourth, we should move aggressively to form a strong energy
partnership with Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, and a post-Chavez Venezuela. A
stable Western Hemisphere displacing an unstable Middle East and an increasingly
belligerent Russia as the center of the world’s energy production would create countless
jobs for Americans and energy security for the world.
In Asia, the question of whether China’s rise will be peaceful and
respectful of their neighbors is one of our biggest long-term challenges, but we must
make it abundantly clear that we are firmly committed to our defense agreements and
firmly committed to our allies to the freedom of navigation on our seas, and the growing
strategic importance of Asia actually heightens, not diminishes, the importance of
Europe.
U.S.-European cooperation is a valuable compliment to our work with our
East Asia allies. See, all of us, Asians, Americans, Europeans, have a common interest
in seeing China evolve in a peaceful and democratic direction and we have a common
interest in seeing China abide by the rules of the international economic order.
The United States, Europe and East Asia represent 71 percent of the
world’s economy. That’s a lot of leverage and we should use it to address problems, 
 
16
such as China’s disregard for intellectual property rights, gross human rights violations,
its unfair trade practices, its currency manipulation, and the looming presence of China
state-owned industries.
In addition, this U.S.-EU partnership is critical to a more realistic
approach to Russia. I know some here might disagree, and certainly the President
would, but I feel like we’ve gotten precious little from Russia in return for its concessions
on nuclear weapons. The reason is because Russia’s domestic politics shape its foreign
policies.
An autocratic Russia tends to be more anti-Western and to act in ways
that make it harder to integrate Russia into the global community and the free
international order.
Now, Putin may talk tough, but he knows he’s weak. Everywhere he
looks he sees threats to his rule, real and imagined, and so he uses state-owned media
to preach paranoia and anti-Western sentiments to Russians. He faces a rising China to
the east and hostile Islamic forces to the south, but he tells his people that the biggest
threat they face is from NATO.
Some of our allies in Europe increasingly feel that our recent reset
with Russia tended to ignore, and in some cases, undermined them. We need to
reenergize and lead a united coalition with European nations to tackle issues
ranging from missile defense to the continued enlargement of NATO.
Furthermore, if we are successful in forming a Western Hemisphere Coalition that
takes advantage of the shale gas revolution, we will be able to help our European 
 
17
allies, reduce their coerced dependence on Russian energy, as well.
A reenergized US/European coalition can help empower those
forces within Russia, working to end corruption and open their political system. And
if that happens, then we will be closer than ever to the bipartisan American vision
endorsed by both the Clinton administration and the Bush administrations of a
Europe, whole and free.
Faced with historic deficits and dangerous national debt, there's
been increasing talk of reducing our foreign aid budget, but we need to remember
that these international coalitions that we have the opportunity to lead are not just
military ones, they can also be humanitarian ones. In every region of the world, we
should always search for ways to use US aid and humanitarian assistance to
strengthen our influence, the effectiveness of our leadership, and the service of our
interests and ideals.
When done so effectively, in partnership with the private sector,
with faith-based organizations and with our allies, foreign aid is a very cost-effective
way, not only to export our values and our example, but to advance our security and
our economic interests. One of the programs that I am proudest of is the effort that
began under President George W. Bush with robust congressional support, and it's
continued under President Obama, and that's to combat AIDS in Africa. 
 
18
Millions of human beings are alive today because the United
States, and others in the global community, are paying for their anti viral medication.
This investment allows us to say, without any hint of exaggeration, that by 2015, the
world could see the beginning of the end of AIDS, something that was unthinkable
just a few years ago. We need to continue this kind of foreign aid investment, not
just in PEPFAR, but in malaria control and vaccine programs and in agriculture
initiatives so that we can make similar strides in preventing hunger and establishing
a healthy global community.
This was by no means intended to be a comprehensive analysis of
our challenges and opportunities around the world, after all, we could dedicate entire
speeches to the emergence of functional states in Africa, or the challenges
supposed by the Arab Spring. My purpose was not to catalog our interests in every
corner of the planet, my purpose was to argue that the world is a better place
because of America's engagement in it, and it will continue to get better only if we
continue to engage.
Now, I disagree with the way in which the current administration
has chosen to engage, for while there are few global problems we can solve by
ourselves, there are virtually no global problems that can be solved without us. In
confronting the challenges of our time, there are more nations than ever capable of 
 
19
contributing, but there is still only one nation capable of leading.
And I disagree with voices in my own party who argue that we
should not engage at all, who warn that we should heed the words of John Quincy
Adams not to go abroad in search of monsters to destroy. I disagree, because all
around us, we see the human face of America's influence. It actually begins not with
our government, but with our people.
Millions of people have been the catalyst of democratic change in
their own countries, but they never would have been able to connect with each other
if an American had not invented Twitter. The atrocities of Joseph Kony would be
largely unknown, but in fact, millions of people know about it because an American
made a film and distributed it on another American innovation, YouTube.
And even in our military engagements, the lasting impact of our
influence on the world is hard to ignore. Millions of people have emerged from
poverty around the world in part because our Navy protects the freedom of the seas,
allowing the ever-increasing flow of goods between nations. And long after the last
American soldier has left Afghanistan, God willing, there will be a millions-strong and
productive and independent Afghan women, because today, they are the first girls in
generations to attend school, thanks to the generosity of the American people.
We do these things because we're a compassionate people, but we 
 
20
also do it because it's in our national interest. Because perhaps more than any
other nation on Earth, we understand that a world that is freer, more just, more
peaceful and more prosperous poses less of a threat. Now, look, I know this is a
time of great uncertainty, a time when many wonder if America is in decline.
And, once again, as Bob Kagan points out in his book, however,
there have been other times when we felt less than confident about the future. We
need to look no further than the decade of my birth for an example; in the 1970s, we
experienced setbacks against communism in Asia, the collapse of trust in
government, the oil shock, Stagflation, high interest rates, Soviet expansion, the
hostage crisis in Iran, and disco music.
Americans were worried that something had permanently changed
for our country, we couldn't be certain our standard of living would improve
generation after generation, and even less certain that we could maintain America's
primacy in world affairs. Then, as now, a serious school of thought emerged to
confirm these worries, and it gained attention in our national debates.
We had a nice run, but nothing lasts forever, the argument went,
our problems are too numerous, our resources are too depleted, our economy too
dependent on dying industries, our public institutions too inadaptable, and our rivals
too potent for us to keep pace with, much less stay ahead of. And now, they said, 
 
21
back then, the most important responsibility of public officials is to manage our
decline intelligently and to mitigate its consequences at home and abroad.
We know now, of course, that that's not how it turned out. By the
end of next decade, few were speculating about what the world would be like without
American leadership, because we were, once again, in a unique interpolar moment
when American power and influence seemed virtually unchallenged. Well, now
we're worried again, and that's understandable, the pace of change in the world is
so fast, and the challenges we face are so numerous and serious that many
Americans worry that we can't sustain our way of life at home, much less maintain
the burden of leading the world.
The financial crisis, the steep drop in the value of our homes, a
deep recession and excruciating slow recovery, high unemployment, stagnant
wages, record budget deficits and public debt, a lack of confidence in the ability of
our government and political system to solve problems, soaring energy prices,
too-long wars, new and complex threats to international peace and stability, and the
rapid rise of China as an economic competitor and a rival for global influence.
There are plenty of reasons to worry. And yet, with all these
problems, there's absolutely no reason why America cannot remain a global super
power in this new century, as well. We have a huge head start in dealing with the 
 
22
challenges of transforming; we have the advantage of concentrating more of our
energies, resources, productivity and innovation on figuring out the future.
Our continued power is possible, but it is not self-perpetuating, it
will require us to do what every generation of Americans before us has done;
confront and solve the pressing domestic challenges of our time. It may not seem
that way, if you follow the daily news coming in from around the world, but this new
century is a time of great promise.
It is not the promise of a perfect world, not one without injustice,
violence, conflict, hunger or disease, it is the promise of a better world, better than
the one we have today, better than the one we have ever known, a world where
democratically elected leaders govern as responsible democrats, and avoid armed
conflicts with their neighbors, a world where oppressing women or selling children is
not culturally acceptable anywhere, a world where AIDS is a disease of history, and
starvation is no longer part of our future, a world of extraordinary innovation.
The generations born since the spread of the worldwide web are
the most skilled collaborators ever. And now that everyone, everywhere, can talk to
anyone, anywhere, at any time, they can talk to each other and come up with new
ideas that are still unimaginable to us today. Above all else, the 21st century
provides us the opportunity for more freedom, a world where more people are free to 
 
23
grow their economies, free to pursue their dreams, free to become prosperous. This
is the promise of this new century, but it will not happen if we are not engaged, it will
not happen if we do not lead.
Why does it have to start with us, some say, why do we have to do
it? We find our answer in the words of a non-American in an address to Congress in
2003, British Prime Minister, Tony Blair, said; "I know it's hard on America. And in
some small corner of this vast country, out in Nevada or Idaho or these places I've
never been to but always wanted to go, I know out there there's a guy getting on
with his life, perfectly happy, minding his own business, saying to you, the political
leaders of this country, 'Why me, and why us, and why America?'
"And the only answer is, because destiny put you in this place in
history in this moment in this time, and the task is yours to do." And so it is, for this
century is a time of tremendous challenge, but it is also a time of tremendous
promise. This is, indeed, the world America made, and it is freer and more
prosperous than it has ever been, and it can be even better. As Americans, we
cannot make that happen ourselves, but the world cannot make it happen without
us.
Thank you very much. 