Thank you. I’ll actually be 44 in about three weeks, but I feel 45,
so it must be all the airplane travel. Thank you for having me. It is
actually an honor to be here. Before I stood here a moment ago,
we were discussing the long history of this organization and some
of the people that have spoken here in the past, and so it’s an honor
to be included now in that list. No matter what happens from here
on out, I’ll always be on that list, and it’s an honor to be with you.
I do want to talk to you about the future of our country. I do want
to talk to you about the 21st century. And I want to talk to you
about it by reminding you, first of all, of who America has been for
the last two centuries. Probably the best way to do that is to
remember that for almost all of human history, the vast majority of
people that have ever lived were trapped by the circumstances of
their birth. In essence, they lived in societies where their future
was dependent on what their parents did before them, no matter
how hard they worked, or how much they tried.
My parents lived like that. They were born to poor families in
Cuba. They had no connections to wealth or to power, and so in
search of a better life they came to America in 1956. Here in
America, they never became rich and they never became famous,
yet they lived meaningful and successful lives, because they found
stable jobs, because they were able to retire with dignity, and
because they were able to leave all four of their children better off
than themselves. So why was that possible? How did two people,
born into poor families with very limited education, how were they
able to achieve a life better than the one they were born into? And
the answer is, because they had the blessing of being able to live in
America during the American century. Our identity as a land of
equal opportunity actually began in our founding the Declaration
of Independence that says that all men are created equal, endowed
by their creator, not by their government, not by their laws, not by
their Constitution, by their creator, with the right to life, and to
liberty, and to pursue happiness. And then in the early years of the
19th century a still developing America had to make a choice.
It could either embrace the promise of the future, it could embrace
industrialization, or it could be left behind by history. And that
generation of Americans, at the turn of the 19th century, they
embraced industrialization, with all of its promise and with all of
its disruptions. And less than 100 years later, America was the
single most powerful economy on the planet. The 20th century
became the American century, a century with an economy that
gave birth to what we now know as the American dream, and a 
 
2
century where not once, but twice, this great nation was called
upon to help the world save it from evil. But now, in the early
years of this new century, a growing number of people are starting
to doubt whether we’re still that kind of country. And the reason
why they feel that way is because of the way their lives are being
led. There are families that are working as hard as they ever have,
sometimes at the same jobs they’ve had forever, but they’re living
paycheck to paycheck, one unexpected expense away from
disaster.
There are young couples and entrepreneurs who are trying to start
a business out of the spare bedroom of their home, but they can’t
deal with the government rules and the regulations and the
evisceration of small banks and lack of access to capital. There are
students who did everything that we told them they needed to do to
succeed. We told them, “Go to college. Get a degree,” and they
did that, and now they’ve graduated with a mountain of student
loan debt, and degrees that do not lead to jobs. And around the
world every single day the news says that evil is winning and
America seems less capable than ever of doing anything to stop it.
Why is this happening? It is not, as some believe, the inevitable
decline of a once great nation. It is not, as some believe, the
normal course of history, that we were once on top, and now we
are destined to decline like the great nations before us. That is not
what’s happening. What is happening is the direct result of our
leaders; of leaders who are both trapped in the past when it comes
to economic policies, but have also forgotten fundamental and
timeless truths about the nature of the world. Today, we face a
fundamental economic transformation, bigger and faster than the
Industrial Revolution was in the 19th century.
Because of globalization, jobs and prosperity are directly tied to
our ability to compete internationally, and yet we have leaders that
continue to want to tax us and regulate us and borrow us into an
uncompetitive position, and today America is not as globally
competitive as it should be. Because of technology and
automation, the nature of work has changed. Many of the jobs that
once sustained our middle class are now done by machines, or
they’ve gone overseas, or they don’t pay what they once did in
comparison to the cost of living. But we have outdated leaders that
want to continue to pour money into an outdated 20th century
higher education system that costs too much and leaves too many
of our people unprepared to compete in the 21st century economy.
And despite all of these changes that are going on economically, 
 
3
there are still fundamental truths that apply, and one of them is that
the price of a lack of American leadership is global chaos and
danger. And so now, just as we did two centuries ago, our nation
stands at a hinge moment in our history, where we must decide
once again, do we want to embrace the future or be left behind by
history?
We cannot embrace this future led by people who are trapped in
yesterday. The ideas of the 20th century, even the ones that worked
back then, sometimes don’t work anymore, and the bad ideas of
the 20th century are disastrous in the 21st. Turning the page is what
we need to do as a nation and as a society, and it begins by putting
in place policies that make us globally competitive again, with a
very simple goal: we want America to be the best place in the
world to work, to start a business, or to invent things. And that’s
why we need regulatory reform. That’s why we need tax reform.
That’s why we need to repeal the disastrous healthcare law, and
that’s why we need to bring our debt under control. If we do those
four things, if we do those four things, we will once again be
globally competitive. We will once again be the best place in the
world to invest and innovate and create jobs and opportunity for
other people. The second thing we have to do is we must reform
our outdated system of higher education. For starters, we have to
start graduating people from high school ready to work as welders,
as plumbers, as machinists.
These are important trades that we have shortages of. These are
good paying jobs, and somehow our society has stigmatized them,
and we no longer prepare 16, 17, and 18 year olds to enter the
workplace immediately or soon thereafter. We need to create
flexibility for working parents and working families to be able to
go back to school and acquire a degree or a certificate that allows
them to improve their employment opportunities, so that the
receptionist at a law firm can become a paralegal, so that the home
health aide making $9.00 an hour can become a dental hygienist
making $60,000.00 a year. The problem is if you have to work full
time and raise a family today, you can’t drop everything and go to
a traditional school for two to four years. You need flexible
programs that are cost effective, affordable, and allow you to study
online, on weekends, and on your own pace. We also need to
reform traditional higher education. There will always be a place
for the traditional college degree, but we cannot continue to
graduate people with a mountain of debt and degrees that do not
lead to jobs, which is why I’ve proposed a bipartisan bill that says, 
 
4
straightforward, before you take out a student loan, that school has
to tell you how much people make when they graduate with that
degree from that school, so people can decide whether it’s worth
borrowing $20,000.00 or $30,000.00 or $40,000.00 to pursue a
particular degree.
And yet as we embrace all of these opportunities and change our
policies for this new era, we still have to understand the
fundamental truth about global evens, and the fundamental truth is
that there is no replacement for America on the world stage. When
America gives up its leadership role in the world, chaos inevitably
follows, and that’s what we see everywhere in the world today.
Only America can rally our Asian allies in the Asia Pacific region
to confront China’s blatant efforts to basically gain control of the
most important shipping lane in the world, the South China Sea.
Only America can reinvigorate NATO to prevent Vladimir Putin
from re-drawing the map of Europe in the aftermath of the Cold
War. Only America can work with our allies in the Middle East to
confront both Iran’s ambitions, and also the rise of radical jihad,
and only America can provide the support that Israel needs in order
to survive as a peaceful Jewish state. Today, in the absence of that
leadership, all of those regions of the world find themselves in
chaos.
Today in the 21st century global leadership isn’t just about national
security anymore; it’s also about prosperity. Because you and I are
4 percent of the world’s population. We Americans are 4 to 5
percent of the world’s population. There is only so much
prosperity we can create if all we do is sell things to each other.
We need there to be millions of people on this planet that can
afford to buy the services we offer, the goods we manufacture, and
the products we invent, but you cannot have global prosperity
without global stability, and you cannot have global stability
without strong American leadership. So I guess the way I would
wrap this up is by reminding us now that for over two centuries,
every generation of Americans has had to answer a very
fundamental question: what kind of country do you want America
to be? And for over two centuries, facing difficult and different
challenges, each generation has said, “We want America to remain
special.” Now the time has come for this generation of Americans
to answer the exact same question.
In the face of these rapid and disruptive changes, we are called to
confront the challenges, and to embrace the opportunities of this 
 
5
exciting new era. We should be proud of our history, but yesterday
is over, and it is never going to come back. Before us now is the
exciting opportunity to usher in the greatest chapter in the story of
America. For if we do the things that I’ve outlined, if we become
globally competitive again, if we equip our people with the skills
they need for the 21st century, if we once again re-exercise
American leadership on the global stage, the 21st century won’t
just be as good as the 20th century, it will be better. The American
dream won’t just survive, it’ll reach more people and change more
lives. And this 21st century will also be an American century. If
we fail, we will be the first Americans to leave the next generation
worse off. It reminds me, you asked about the state of this
election.
Well, I believe with all my heart that this next election will not
simply be a choice about what political party will govern the
country, or what laws we’re going to pass. I believe this next
election is a generational choice about the very identity of our
nation. I entered this race with no sense of entitlement to the office
of the presidency. On the contrary, America doesn’t owe me
anything, but I have a debt to America that I will never ever be
able to repay. America isn’t just the country I was born in; it’s
literally the nation that changed the history of my family. After his
mother died, when he was nine years old, my father went to work
in the streets of Havana with his father, and he would work for the
next 70 years of his life. My mother was one of seven girls raised
by a disabled father who always struggled to provide for his
children. When my parents were young, they had dreams too, but
because they were born into poor families with no political
connections, those dreams never had a chance.
So they came here, to the one place on earth where their dreams
could have the opportunity to turn into reality. Here in America,
my father became a bartender. My mother was a maid. She was a
stock clerk at K-Mart. She was a cashier. As I told you at the
outset, they never made it big. They were never rich. They were
never famous, but they were successful, because they achieved
what has come to be known as the American dream. And they
didn’t just live in America. My parents became Americans. My
mother said she realized that she had become an American on that
horrible day in November of 1963, when President Kennedy was
killed and she wept, because her president had been slain. My
grandfather, who was born in 1899 before there were even
airplanes in the sky, told me once when I was a boy that he knew 
 
6
he had become an American on that night in 1969 when on
television he watched a man step foot on the moon. And he
thought to himself, “We Americans, we can do anything.”
For my father, it probably wasn’t one moment. I think for my
father it was the realization that just a few decades removed from
poverty and despair, he was able, he, an immigrant, with little
education or money, was able to have a stable job, own a home,
retire with security, and make possible for his children all the
things that were never possible for him. My point is that whether
we are Americans by birth or Americans by choice, every single
one of us has a debt to this country we will never be able to repay,
because every single one of us inherited from those who came
before us an exceptional nation. And now the time has come for
this generation of Americans to do its part, not just to achieve the
American dream for ourselves, but to make it possible for those
who are trying to do for their children what our parents did for us.
For the single mother who sacrifices and struggles so that her
children will never have to go through what she did.
For the workers on the late shift who go to school after they get out
of work because they want a better life for themselves and for their
families. For the young couple who’s trying to start a business out
of the spare bedroom of their home. In their hands is the future of
our country. Because if their dreams become impossible, we have
just become another country, no different, no better, and no longer
special. But if their dreams are alive, then the 21st century will be
the greatest era in our history. It will also be an American century.
And I hope that we will take up the calling of our time, because if
we do, future generations will look back at us and say that like
those who came before us, we did our part, and because we did,
because we did, the American miracle lived on. Because we did,
the 21st century was also an American century, and because we
did, we left for our children what Americans always leave for their
children, the single greatest nation in the history of the world.
Thank you for the chance to talk to you about this. I look forward
to answering your questions. Thank you very much. 